Hello everyone I'm Dr. Kate Deibel, otherwise
known as @metageeky on Twitter and Slack.
There will be some messages about this talk
and some additional information going out
on the various conference channels
as I begin. So today,I'm talking
about "Thinking Beyond the
Basics ofAccessibility"
but before that I want to
givea land acknowledgement
to the Onondaga nation, fire
keepers of the Huadenosaunee,
the indigenous people on whose
ancestral lands SyracuseUniversity
and its people now stand, sit, walk, and roll.
We respect all abilities here.
So this is my seventh Code4Lib. I started in 2015
and that makes me an old timer
And as an old timer, I've talked quite abit
about accessibility issues over the years
I gave a lightning talk my
first year as a newcomer
on keyboard accessibility so you newcomers
should definitely do a lightningtalk!
I have also given talks about
accessiblesearch result catalogs
Accessibility reviewsof websites
that many librarians like to use
and talked last year about text
formats and what their various
accessibility strengths and weaknesses are.
In general, when I've been choosing these topics
these have been topics that both interested
me but were also important nuggets Ifelt
every library technology person
could benefitfrom hearing.
Now this year, though, I'm going toadmit
that I'm being pretty selfish
I'm focusingonly on an accessibility topic that
interests me, and it's been a long running one.
One that I'veactually been interested in since
my days as a doctoral student looking for a
thesis topic. Of course, I didn't get to work on
it because nobody back in 2005 envisioned that
we would have this massive ecosystem of mobile
portable technologies and we'd be reading on them.
Yeah, nah you could havelistened to me but nope!
But just to go on like this, the reason why
I'm focusing to something that I'm interested
in is I'm trying to address some critical
burnout that's happening to me right now.
And what's going on is so that I'm getting pretty
burnt out on accessibility advocacy. And I'm not
alone in this. This past year has been great
in terms of more and more people realizing
the importance of accessibility,
particularly due to the increased
virtual interactions we've been going
through. But the problem is, though,
we're saying the same things we have always
had to say as accessibilityadvocates:
Use descriptive alt text in your images Please
start using headings to mark up yourdocument!
It helps so much in so many ways.
Don't mess around with ARIA unless
you understand what's going on.
Studies have shown that
websitesthat utilize ARIA tend
to have up to 60% more errors in them than
sites that don't. So be careful with it.
And most importantly,
AI subtitles are not a replacement
for human written captioning...
Yeah. So really we have such a long wayto go
in terms of basic accessibility compliance
and it's aggravating because last May, WCAG 1.0,
the first specification for web
accessibility guidelines, turned 21.
It can now legally drinkin the United States.
It's been drinking inother countries
for a while too but it can
noweven legally drink here.
And that is exhausting because it's not only
that we're having to repeatourselves.
There are these complex topics / advancedissues
that we know exist that we
should beand could be working on
but we can't because we'rehaving
to do this basic big basic advocacy.
So I'm goingto take a few
moments to talk about one
of thesetopics that really really interests me
and onethat goes back to my doctoral days.
I'm going totalk about accessibility around
collaboration, particularly collaboration with
documents. So let's take a look on how document
accessibility typically works now in the library.
So we typicallyhave a book, you know,
some some form of text. A document. Could
be print, digital, could be anarticle.
And then we have a patron. In this case,
the patrons here are going to be represented
by cute pictures of people's pets
So Fiona here isa cute tuxedo cat.
She has limited visual acuity.
Has an executive functioning disorder meaning
that she needs support with organization.
And the combination of these disabilities tends to
mean that she really prefers listening to her text
and actually asks for them to be transformed
into MP3s separated by either major chapter
or section. So that it's organized
a little bit easier forher to use.
now it might turn out that there
isactually a third person involved
in this such asmyself, so
an accessibility librarian.
Here, I amnot represented by a pet
image. I'm represented by the avatar
I use which is a cartoon version of my
best spectacled, brunette, geeky self.
And myrole in this is
actually to pretty much assist
with the patron being able to access the text.
So I might be doing the remediation of
it. i might I might be assisting
them with their assistive technology,
either recommending better tools
or helping themconfigure it.
But functionally---but ultimately,
I amleaving them alone to how they work with it.
So is this document collaboration
right now? It isn't is it?
Fiona and I are not doing a shared task
over the text document collaboration is when
multiple people discuss and work around a common
text and this is actually a very common action.
Book clubsare actually one of the
most common forms of it where a group
of people read and discuss the same
book be it fiction or non-fiction.
We have researchgroups where
people are constantly working
overpublished materials, their own reports,
everything And in businesses we have committees
This isnot unique to just the university or
academia. This is our information society.
Collaboratingover documents is pervasive and
the implications of this is that what happens
when you start to introduce accessibility and
disability concerns into one of these groups?
So you might thinkwhat happens
when one person has a disability?
And I'm going to tell you
you're thinkingwrong there.
The actual question you should ask is what happens
when one or more persons in
the group has a disability?
What happens when they have different access
or technology needs? And in particular,
What ifthose different needs
interact or interfere witheach other?
What do you do then? What is needed?
And the reality is is that when we're talking
about inclusive accessible document collaboration
We might have a bunch of users. Might have
all these different pets: cats, dogs, a rat.
You know,all these inter---all these
people working around a common text and
there could be all sorts ofinteractions involved.
So let's just look at somepotential
ones that could exist.
So let's go back to Fiona. As i said, Fiona---she
has some limited vision and listens to audiobooks
to help with her organizational issues
Now, Fiona's going tobe working
with Luna, a very cute brown hound dog
with definitely puppy dog begging eyes.
Shealso has low vision, but she uses a screen
reader and thus requires a fully remediated
electronic version of the text such as a PDF or
EPUB3. Now, in terms of interaction, where they're
going to start running into problems is that Luna,
because she is actually working with the text,
can actually refer to specific pages, sentences,
paragraphs, columns, all sorts of things like
that. Fiona is listening to just the audio
version and doesn't have access to the source text
so therefore she's actually not going to be
able to necessarily go to the same places that
Luna is referring to. Their collaboration.
is going to be muddled because of that.
Now, in terms of a solution for this, there are
basically this something doesn't exist yet but
basically we need better talking book technology
that both has access to the underlying text source
but also supports executive functioning more.
The current technology, screen readers youknow,
tools that read PDF aloud, typically are
just focused on that text access but not
necessarily the organizational skills around
that. Let's go to another interaction. Here now,
we're going to introduce Tess. Tess is a a
gray fluffy cat with uh light green eyes.
She has dyslexia, meaning that her reading
is a little bit more labored and slow,
but she also has a very strong glare sensitivity.
So she definitely does not prefer reading off
of electronic screens and tends to print out
everything. And often to support her dyslexia,
she's found that certain fonts and other types
of graphical settings help. Now, we also have
Fluffernutter who is another cat, but she's a very
light creamsicle cat with gorgeous blue eyes. She
has weak vision and difficulty also sitting up for
a long period of time so she uses magnification
and works off of a tablet, so, you know,
an iPad, Windows Surface, something like that.
And so she's constantly zooming in on the text.
Now, there can be several interaction issues here.
One is is that Tess's printed out text is going
to be laid out different than Fluffernutters's.
And so they're going to be constantly like
they can be on different pages and everything.
Line breaks are going to be different, and
even like, you know, reference points where
you might say it's like near the top
of this page or next to that picture of
a frog because apparently there's a picture
of a frog in this. They will be, you know,
they're not going to have that shared context
to be working with. Fluffernutter is also going
tobe working with a much smaller contextual
frame. because Fluffernutter---I'm sorry,
Fluffernutter is a boy, I keep
forgetting that---Fluffernutter is
just focused in on that.
So, you know, what solution can we
need her? One for Tess, we definitely
need improved e-text displays that
cut down on glare sensitivity but
also allow for more customization.
Kindle Paperwhite is pretty good
but in terms of its accessibility
features it's pretty limited just as Amazon's
always been kind of weak on that side. Better
type setting algorithms that can help keep figures
and text sections together will also address
some of these issues. But then there's also
features such as an EPUB3 that are good about
marking and exposing original page breaks.
These can be exposed in there and they're
really valuable for helping people who are working
across different, you know, formats. Print versus
digital, you know. Be able to refer to pages and
everything but they need to be exposed better.
There's a lot of user experience work that
needs to happen there and with all this research
research research. This type of interaction
is not discussed that much or if at all.
Let's get into one other one here. So here we have
Ivy and Wilbur. Ivy is a diluted calico cat with
olive tan eyes. Ivy is hard of hearing and needs
captioning. Due to just the knowledge that you
know getting a human captioner is tricky, they can
tolerate AI subtitles if necessary. But there's a
limit to that. But now we have Wilbur. Wilbur
is a chubby white chihuahua with gorgeous dark
eyes and you just want to hug him. And Wilbur
both has anxiety and a very pronounced stutter.
And the two of them feed into each other.
Sowhat's going to happen in this interaction?
This really isn't necessarily about print access
but more about the actual act of collaboration.
Ivy is going to be frustrated as the AI subtitles
are going to struggle with Wilbur's stutter and
Wilbur might actually end up getting---his stutter
might actually get exacerbated because he's seeing
he's experiencing both Ivy's frustration,
and if he turns on the captions, he'll
see that his stutter is even worse. So you're
gonna get this horrible feedback loop in here.
But let's make this even more fun. Let's
throw in Dash. Dash is a very cute gray rat.
Dash has a heavy Spanish accent and he also has
a bit of PTDS from a racist attack in this all
so great country of the last four years. But
Dash here now has even further issues going on.
For Dash, Dash is going to be, he's going
to hope that nobody says anything about
speaking proper English. He knows that
the captions were probably going to be
you know having difficulty with his accent
which will aggravate Ivy more and so we have
all this going on. And this is just interaction
of, you know, pretty much just one technology
there and to be able to work together they're
going to be facing a lot of challenges. Now,
there are multiple solutions here. The first is
to recognize that text-based chat which is another
means of them communicating would work but that's
largely just a bandage. You know there's only so
much, you know, text-based communication is just
not as fast and flowing as conversation can be.
But involved in this, though, is like there should
be better promotion, support, infrastructure, and
funding for human-provided captioning. If that's
actually funded / provided, then you wouldn't
be running into this. Captioners can often adjust
way better and more more fluidly to challenges in
in presentation. And there's also too, I will say,
is that maybe we can improve AI voice recognition
and some things that might be involved with that
is actually building up profiles for individual
speakers and being able to to counter
those effects where it's like going. Oh,
Dash has a heavy Spanish accent. That is something
we can prepare for and load a different model. Or
Wilbur's, you know, stuttering. You could like
work with that but we need to actually do that,
and the researchers and designers need to
think about this. Now, I'm going to admit that
last one was not necessarily about you know,
accessibility anddocument collaboration but
it still has a point is that there's a lot
of work in accessibility and user experience
that over focus on the needs of single users but
doesn't really think about fundamental group tasks
and one of those fundamental group tasks I think
about a lot is the collaboration over shared
text. Just even chatting is any fundamental
tasks that we're not necessarily thinking
fully about particularly in terms of
access to people with disabilities.
And, yeah you know, I said this is just what I
said and you know the big thing is too I want
to point out i was only talking about reading
documents none of this had to involve the access
issues involved with writing and editing a
document. The very fact is we're ignoring
so many multiple technical technology
interactions and meeting user needs.
Especially in the case of disabilities and access.
The interaction scenarios I presented are barely
hypothetical they occurred today and will occur
more and more and accessibility advocates and
researchers can begin addressing these needs
now but they need the time and opportunity
to do so and how you can help is learn the
basics of accessibility, adopt them into regular
practice, and ask questions of new technologies.
Askif AI subtitles / captions
will actually besufficient.
And more importantly do not discount
the lived experiences of disabled people
Aim for more than minimal accessibility standards.
Go way beyond what what WCAG demands and learn.
Continue to learn. Thank you. Now before I open up
for questions, I just want to address something a
few things real quick. One you might actually
have some problems by using photos to portray
disabled people particularly given that you might
say oh that's saying that disabled people are
sub-human. I'm going to admit that a lot of
social and medical stigma tends to actually
treat disabled people otherwise. That's been my
experience. Instead, I want to point out the pet
images prove the point that disabled people are
important parts of many people people's lives,
greatly loved by their family and friends, and
are exceptionally cute. Yes that's the case.
And so I wanted to thank the people who donated
their pictures. I had a lot more that I couldn't
fit in and I just want to add one final thing a
little... bit of sad news. You might have noticed
that my frequently featured cat Francie wasn't
among the pets featured in this talk. Sadly,
last year, the cat that starred in my first ever
accessibility talk at Code4Lib as the keyboard
accessibility "no mice" cat. She sadly passed away
shortly after Code4Lib. She was a great cat. Very
loved and very missed, but i have another cat in
my life. Fiona is my new tuxedo partner in life.
and she is definitely a different character
but I love her and she's a snuggle bug
So let's open up for questions and as usual, feel
free to talk with me about accessibility issues
and libraries whenever, you know, you can reach
me so let's open up. I have about 2.5 minutes.